
Layer: يَقُولُ رَاجِي الْخَالِقِ * هُوَ الْأَمِينُ مُوافِقِي
يَقُولُ رَاجِي الْخَالِقِ * هُوَ الْأَمِينُ مُوافِقِي

Layer: Says the one hopeful in his Creator, He is Al-Amin Muwafiqi:
Says the one hopeful in his Creator,
He is Al-Amin Muwafiqi:

Layer: حَمْدًا لِمَنْ هَدَانِي * لِسُنَّةِ الْعَدْنَانِي
حَمْدًا لِمَنْ هَدَانِي * لِسُنَّةِ الْعَدْنَانِي

Layer: Praise be to Him who guided me To the Sunnah of the Adnani,
Praise be to Him who guided me
To the Sunnah of the Adnani,

Layer: مُحَمَّدِ الْمُخْتَارِ * وَسَيِّدِ الأَطْهَارِ
مُحَمَّدِ الْمُخْتَارِ * وَسَيِّدِ الأَطْهَارِ

Layer: Muhammad, the Chosen One, And the master of the pure ones.
Muhammad, the Chosen One,
And the master of the pure ones.

Layer: فَهَذِهِ أُرْجُوزَةْ * لَطِيفَةٌ وَجِيْزَةْ
فَهَذِهِ أُرْجُوزَةْ * لَطِيفَةٌ وَجِيْزَةْ

Layer: This is a poem, Pleasant and concise,
This is a poem,
Pleasant and concise,

Layer: فِي سِيرَةِ الْمُطَهَّرِ * شَفِيعِنَا فِي الْمَحْشَرِ
فِي سِيرَةِ الْمُطَهَّرِ * شَفِيعِنَا فِي الْمَحْشَرِ

Layer: Concerning the biography of the purified one, Our intercessor on the Day of Gathering.
Concerning the biography of the purified one,
Our intercessor on the Day of Gathering.

Layer: كَتَبْتُهَا لِتُنْشَرَا * بَيْنَ الأَنْامِ وَالْوُرَى
كَتَبْتُهَا لِتُنْشَرَا * بَيْنَ الأَنْامِ وَالْوُرَى

Layer: I wrote it so it may spread Among mankind and the people.
I wrote it so it may spread
Among mankind and the people.

Layer: فَاللّهَ رَبِّي أَسْأَلُ * إِتْمَامَ مَا أُؤَمِّلُ
فَاللّهَ رَبِّي أَسْأَلُ * إِتْمَامَ مَا أُؤَمِّلُ

Layer: So I ask Allah, my Lord, To complete what I hope for.
So I ask Allah, my Lord,
To complete what I hope for.

Layer: أَسْمَاؤُهُ الشَّرِيفَةْ * عَدِيدَةٌ مُنِيفَةْ
أَسْمَاؤُهُ الشَّرِيفَةْ * عَدِيدَةٌ مُنِيفَةْ

Layer: His noble names are many and lofty.
His noble names are many and lofty.

Layer: قَدْ جَاءَ فِي الْقُرْآنِ * عَنِ الْإِلَهِ اسْمَانِ
قَدْ جَاءَ فِي الْقُرْآنِ * عَنِ الْإِلَهِ اسْمَانِ

Layer: In the Quran there came from God two names:
In the Quran there came from God two names:

Layer: أَشْهَرُهَا مُحَمَّدُ * وَجَاءَ أَيْضًا أَحْمَدُ
أَشْهَرُهَا مُحَمَّدُ * وَجَاءَ أَيْضًا أَحْمَدُ

Layer: The most famous of them is Muhammad, and there also came Ahmad.
The most famous of them is Muhammad, and there also came Ahmad.

Layer: وَجَاءَ فِي الصِّحَاحِ * الْحَاشِرُ وَالْمَاحِيُ
وَجَاءَ فِي الصِّحَاحِ * الْحَاشِرُ وَالْمَاحِيُ

Layer: And in the authentic books of hadith came: the Gatherer and the Eraser,
And in the authentic books of hadith came: the Gatherer and the Eraser,

Layer: وَالعَاقِبُ الْمُقَفِّي * بِمَا مَضَى نَسْتَكْفِي
وَالعَاقِبُ الْمُقَفِّي * بِمَا مَضَى نَسْتَكْفِي

Layer: And the final Successor, and with what has passed, we suffice.
And the final Successor, and with what has passed, we suffice.

Layer: وَمَوْلِدُ الرَّسُولِ * وَافَقَ عَامَ الْفِيلِ
وَمَوْلِدُ الرَّسُولِ * وَافَقَ عَامَ الْفِيلِ

Layer: and the birth of the Messenger coincided with the Year of the Elephant.
and the birth of the Messenger coincided with the Year of the Elephant.

Layer: فِي مَكَّةَ الْمُكَرَّمَةْ * فِي أُسْرَةٍ مُعَظَّمَةْ
فِي مَكَّةَ الْمُكَرَّمَةْ * فِي أُسْرَةٍ مُعَظَّمَةْ

Layer: In honoured Makkah, within a noble family.
In honoured Makkah, within a noble family.

Layer: هُوَ ابْنُ عَبْدِ اللَّهِ * الْقُرَشِي ذِي الْجَاهِ
هُوَ ابْنُ عَبْدِ اللَّهِ * الْقُرَشِي ذِي الْجَاهِ

Layer: He is the son of Abdullah, the Qurashi, a man of honour.
He is the son of Abdullah, the Qurashi, a man of honour.

Layer: جَدُّهُ عَبْدُ الْمُطَّلِبْ * ذُو حَسَبٍ وَذُو نَسَبْ
جَدُّهُ عَبْدُ الْمُطَّلِبْ * ذُو حَسَبٍ وَذُو نَسَبْ

Layer: His grandfather is Abdul Muttalib, a man of lineage and noble ancestry.
His grandfather is Abdul Muttalib, a man of lineage and noble ancestry.

Layer: آمِنَةٌ أُمُّ النَّبِي * وَبِنْتُ وَهْبِ النَّسَبِ
آمِنَةٌ أُمُّ النَّبِي * وَبِنْتُ وَهْبِ النَّسَبِ

Layer: Aminah is the mother of the Prophet, and she was the daughter of Wahb, of noble descent.
Aminah is the mother of the Prophet, and she was the daughter of Wahb, of noble descent.

Layer: تَكَلَّفَتْ بِنَشْأَتِهْ * مِن بَعْدِ مَوْتِ وَالِدِهْ
تَكَلَّفَتْ بِنَشْأَتِهْ * مِن بَعْدِ مَوْتِ وَالِدِهْ

Layer: She took charge of raising him after the death of his father.
She took charge of raising him after the death of his father.

Layer: مُرْضِعُهُ الزَّكِيَّةْ * حَلِيمَةُ السَّعْدِيَّةْ
مُرْضِعُهُ الزَّكِيَّةْ * حَلِيمَةُ السَّعْدِيَّةْ

Layer: His blessed wet nurse was Halimah Al-Saadiyyah.
His blessed wet nurse was Halimah Al-Saadiyyah.

Layer: تَرَعْرَعَ الصَّبِيُّ * الطَّاهِرُ الزَّكِيُّ
تَرَعْرَعَ الصَّبِيُّ * الطَّاهِرُ الزَّكِيُّ

Layer: The pure and noble child grew up
The pure and noble child grew up

Layer: عِندَ أَفَاضِلِ الْعَرَبْ * فِي بَنِي سَعْدٍ وَنَجَبْ
عِندَ أَفَاضِلِ الْعَرَبْ * فِي بَنِي سَعْدٍ وَنَجَبْ

Layer: Among the best of the Arabs, among Banu Saad and nobility.
Among the best of the Arabs, among Banu Saad and nobility.

Layer: نَبِيُّنَا رَعَى الْغَنَمْ * كَالْأَنْبِيَاءِ فِي الْأُمَمْ
نَبِيُّنَا رَعَى الْغَنَمْ * كَالْأَنْبِيَاءِ فِي الْأُمَمْ

Layer: Our Prophet tended sheep, like the prophets among the nations.
Our Prophet tended sheep, like the prophets among the nations.

Layer: وَبَيْنَمَا وَهْوَ صَبِي * فِي رَعْيِهِ وَاللَّعِبِ
وَبَيْنَمَا وَهْوَ صَبِي * فِي رَعْيِهِ وَاللَّعِبِ

Layer: And while he was still a child, during his shepherding and play,
And while he was still a child, during his shepherding and play,

Layer: إِذَا هُوَ بِالْمَلَكِ * فَشَقَّ صَدْرَهُ الزَّكِي
إِذَا هُوَ بِالْمَلَكِ * فَشَقَّ صَدْرَهُ الزَّكِي

Layer: Suddenly the angel came to him and split open his pure chest.
Suddenly the angel came to him and split open his pure chest.

Layer: أَخْرَجَ مِنْهُ قَلْبَهُ * بِزَمْزَمٍ طَهَّرَهُ
أَخْرَجَ مِنْهُ قَلْبَهُ * بِزَمْزَمٍ طَهَّرَهُ

Layer: He removed his heart from it and cleansed it with Zamzam.
He removed his heart from it and cleansed it with Zamzam.

Layer: وَبَعْدَ مَا نَقَّاهُ * بِحِكْمَةٍ حَشَاهُ
وَبَعْدَ مَا نَقَّاهُ * بِحِكْمَةٍ حَشَاهُ

Layer: And after purifying it, he filled it with wisdom.
And after purifying it, he filled it with wisdom.

Layer: أَتَى حَلِيمَةَ الْخَبَرْ * مِنْ كُلِّ طِفْلٍ قَدْ حَضَرْ
أَتَى حَلِيمَةَ الْخَبَرْ * مِنْ كُلِّ طِفْلٍ قَدْ حَضَرْ

Layer: The news reached Halimah from every child who was present,
The news reached Halimah from every child who was present,

Layer: وَكُلُّهُمْ قَدْ نَقَلَا * مُحَمَّدٌ قَدْ قُتِلَا
وَكُلُّهُمْ قَدْ نَقَلَا * مُحَمَّدٌ قَدْ قُتِلَا

Layer: And all of them reported: “Muhammad has been killed!”
And all of them reported: “Muhammad has been killed!”

Layer: وَحِينَ عَادَ أَخْبَرَا * بِمَا رَأَى وَمَا جَرَى
وَحِينَ عَادَ أَخْبَرَا * بِمَا رَأَى وَمَا جَرَى

Layer: And when he returned, he informed of what he saw and what had happened.
And when he returned, he informed of what he saw and what had happened.

Layer: فَانْزَعَجَتْ حَلِيمَةْ * مِنْ هَذِهِ الْعَظِيمَةْ
فَانْزَعَجَتْ حَلِيمَةْ * مِنْ هَذِهِ الْعَظِيمَةْ

Layer: So Halimah became distressed by this tremendous matter,
So Halimah became distressed by this tremendous matter,

Layer: وَرَدَّتِ الصَّبِيَّا * لِأُمِّهِ رَضِيَّا
وَرَدَّتِ الصَّبِيَّا * لِأُمِّهِ رَضِيَّا

Layer: And she returned the blessed child to his mother.
And she returned the blessed child to his mother.

Layer: وَرَاحَ لِلْمَدِينَةْ * مَعْ أُمِّهِ أَمِينَةْ
وَرَاحَ لِلْمَدِينَةْ * مَعْ أُمِّهِ أَمِينَةْ

Layer: And he went to Madinah with his mother Aminah,
And he went to Madinah with his mother Aminah,

Layer: إِلَى بَنِي النَّجَّارِ * أَخْوَالِهِ الْأَخْيَارِ
إِلَى بَنِي النَّجَّارِ * أَخْوَالِهِ الْأَخْيَارِ

Layer: To Banu al Najjar, his noble [maternal] uncles.
To Banu al Najjar, his noble [maternal] uncles.

Layer: أَخْوَالِهِ مِنَ النَّسَبْ * مِنْ أُمِّ عَبْدِ الْمُطَّلِبْ
أَخْوَالِهِ مِنَ النَّسَبْ * مِنْ أُمِّ عَبْدِ الْمُطَّلِبْ

Layer: His [maternal] uncles through lineage, from the mother of Abdul Muttalib.
His [maternal] uncles through lineage, from the mother of Abdul Muttalib.

Layer: وَفِي طَرِيقِ عَوْدَتِهْ * لِبَيْتِهِ وَبَلْدَتِهْ
وَفِي طَرِيقِ عَوْدَتِهْ * لِبَيْتِهِ وَبَلْدَتِهْ

Layer: And on the journey of his return to his home and land,
And on the journey of his return to his home and land,

Layer: أَجْهَشَ بِالْبُكَاءِ * فِي قَرْيَةِ الأَبَوَاءِ
أَجْهَشَ بِالْبُكَاءِ * فِي قَرْيَةِ الأَبَوَاءِ

Layer: He burst into tears in the village of Al-Abwa.
He burst into tears in the village of Al-Abwa.

Layer: فَاجِعَةٌ قَدْ بَاتَتْ * إِذْ أُمُّهُ قَدْ مَاتَتْ
فَاجِعَةٌ قَدْ بَاتَتْ * إِذْ أُمُّهُ قَدْ مَاتَتْ

Layer: A tragedy had occurred, for his mother had died.
A tragedy had occurred, for his mother had died.

Layer: وَبَعْدَهَا الْيَتِيمُ * كَفَلَهُ الرَّحِيمُ
وَبَعْدَهَا الْيَتِيمُ * كَفَلَهُ الرَّحِيمُ

Layer: After her, the orphan was cared for by the compassionate one,
After her, the orphan was cared for by the compassionate one,

Layer: الْجَدُّ عَبْدُ الْمُطَّلِبْ * ذُو الْمَجْدِ فِي أَرْضِ الْعَرَبْ
الْجَدُّ عَبْدُ الْمُطَّلِبْ * ذُو الْمَجْدِ فِي أَرْضِ الْعَرَبْ

Layer: His grandfather Abdul Muttalib, a man of honour in the land of the Arabs.
His grandfather Abdul Muttalib, a man of honour in the land of the Arabs.

Layer: وَقَدَّرَ الْإِلَهُ * وَفَاةَ مَنْ رَعَاهُ
وَقَدَّرَ الْإِلَهُ * وَفَاةَ مَنْ رَعَاهُ

Layer: Then God decreed the death of the one who cared for him,
Then God decreed the death of the one who cared for him,

Layer: فَانتَقَلَتْ إِلَى أَبِي * طَالِبٍ الشَّهْمِ الْأَبِي
فَانتَقَلَتْ إِلَى أَبِي * طَالِبٍ الشَّهْمِ الْأَبِي

Layer: So the guardianship passed to Abu Talib, the noble and dignified man.
So the guardianship passed to Abu Talib, the noble and dignified man.

Layer: كَفَالَةُ الْيَتِيمِ * نَبِيِّنَا الْعَظِيمِ
كَفَالَةُ الْيَتِيمِ * نَبِيِّنَا الْعَظِيمِ

Layer: Of our great Prophet, the orphan,
Of our great Prophet, the orphan,

Layer: فَضَمَّهُ لِأُسْرَتِهْ * وَجَدَّ فِي رِعَايَتِهْ
فَضَمَّهُ لِأُسْرَتِهْ * وَجَدَّ فِي رِعَايَتِهْ

Layer: He brought him into his household and strove in caring for him.
He brought him into his household and strove in caring for him.

Layer: مَعْ عَمِّهِ الْهُمَامِ * قَدْ سَافَرَا لِلشَّامِ
مَعْ عَمِّهِ الْهُمَامِ * قَدْ سَافَرَا لِلشَّامِ

Layer: With his noble uncle, they travelled to Al-Sham,
With his noble uncle, they travelled to Al-Sham,

Layer: فِي رِحْلَةِ الصَّيْفِ الَّتِي * تَكُونُ لِلْتِّجَارَةِ
فِي رِحْلَةِ الصَّيْفِ الَّتِي * تَكُونُ لِلْتِّجَارَةِ

Layer: On the summer journey that was made for trade.
On the summer journey that was made for trade.

Layer: وَفِي الطَّرِيقِ أَقْبَلَا * بِالْبِشْرِ ثُمَّ قَابَلَا
وَفِي الطَّرِيقِ أَقْبَلَا * بِالْبِشْرِ ثُمَّ قَابَلَا

Layer: And along the way they came forward with joy and then met
And along the way they came forward with joy and then met

Layer: بَحِيرَةَ الْإِمَامَا * الرَّاهِبَ الْهُمَامَا
بَحِيرَةَ الْإِمَامَا * الرَّاهِبَ الْهُمَامَا

Layer: Bahira, the learned monk and honoured man.
Bahira, the learned monk and honoured man.

Layer: فَعَرَفَ النَّبِيَّا * لَمَّا رَءَا الصَّبِيَّا
فَعَرَفَ النَّبِيَّا * لَمَّا رَءَا الصَّبِيَّا

Layer: He recognised the Prophet when he saw the young boy,
He recognised the Prophet when he saw the young boy,

Layer: وَقَالَ إِسْمَعُونِي * فِي الْحَالِ لَا تَعْصُونِي
وَقَالَ إِسْمَعُونِي * فِي الْحَالِ لَا تَعْصُونِي

Layer: And he said: “Listen to me now, and do not disobey me.
And he said: “Listen to me now, and do not disobey me.

Layer: لَا تَدْخُلُوا لِلشَّامِ * بِسَيِّدِ الأَنْامِ
لَا تَدْخُلُوا لِلشَّامِ * بِسَيِّدِ الأَنْامِ

Layer: Do not enter Al-Sham with the master of mankind.
Do not enter Al-Sham with the master of mankind.

Layer: أَخْشَى إِذَا يَرَوْنَهُ * بِالْغَدْرِ يَقْتُلُونَهُ
أَخْشَى إِذَا يَرَوْنَهُ * بِالْغَدْرِ يَقْتُلُونَهُ

Layer: I fear that if they see him, they will treacherously kill him.”
I fear that if they see him, they will treacherously kill him.”

Layer: فَرَدَّهُ لِبَلْدَتِهْ * عَمُّهُ عِندَ خَشْيَتِهْ
فَرَدَّهُ لِبَلْدَتِهْ * عَمُّهُ عِندَ خَشْيَتِهْ

Layer: So his uncle returned him to his homeland out of fear for him.
So his uncle returned him to his homeland out of fear for him.

Layer: وَبَعْدَ أَنْ تَكَامَلَا * شَبَابُهُ وَاكْتَمَلَا
وَبَعْدَ أَنْ تَكَامَلَا * شَبَابُهُ وَاكْتَمَلَا

Layer: After his youth had fully matured and been completed,
After his youth had fully matured and been completed,

Layer: تَزَوَّجَ النَّبِيُّ * الطَّاهِرُ النَّقِيُّ
تَزَوَّجَ النَّبِيُّ * الطَّاهِرُ النَّقِيُّ

Layer: The pure and noble Prophet married
The pure and noble Prophet married

Layer: خَدِيجَةَ الْعَفِيفَةْ * الْمَرْأَةَ الشَّرِيفَةْ
خَدِيجَةَ الْعَفِيفَةْ * الْمَرْأَةَ الشَّرِيفَةْ

Layer: Khadijah, the chaste and honourable woman,
Khadijah, the chaste and honourable woman,

Layer: لِصِدْقِهِ وَعِفَّتِهْ * وَذَاكَ قَبْلَ بِعْثَتِهْ
لِصِدْقِهِ وَعِفَّتِهْ * وَذَاكَ قَبْلَ بِعْثَتِهْ

Layer: Because of his truthfulness and chastity, and that was before his prophethood.
Because of his truthfulness and chastity, and that was before his prophethood.

Layer: وَأَحْسَنَ التِّجَارَةْ * لِلْحُرَّةِ الْمُخْتَارَةْ
وَأَحْسَنَ التِّجَارَةْ * لِلْحُرَّةِ الْمُخْتَارَةْ

Layer: And he excelled in trade for the noble and chosen lady.
And he excelled in trade for the noble and chosen lady.

Layer: وَبَعْدَ خَمْسٍ ثَبَتَتْ * مَعَ الثَّلَاثِينَ أَتَتْ
وَبَعْدَ خَمْسٍ ثَبَتَتْ * مَعَ الثَّلَاثِينَ أَتَتْ

Layer: And after thirty five years had passed,
And after thirty five years had passed,

Layer: شَارَكَ قَوْمَهُ الْبِنَا * فِي كَعْبَةٍ وَائْتُمِنَا
شَارَكَ قَوْمَهُ الْبِنَا * فِي كَعْبَةٍ وَائْتُمِنَا

Layer: He took part with his people in building the Kaabah, and was entrusted
He took part with his people in building the Kaabah, and was entrusted

Layer: بِوَضْعِ ذَاكَ الْحَجَرِ * الْأَسْوَدِ الْمُطَهَّرِ
بِوَضْعِ ذَاكَ الْحَجَرِ * الْأَسْوَدِ الْمُطَهَّرِ

Layer: With placing the blessed Black Stone.
With placing the blessed Black Stone.

Layer: وَبَعْدَ الْأَرْبَعِينَا * مِنْ سِنِّهِ يَقِينَا
وَبَعْدَ الْأَرْبَعِينَا * مِنْ سِنِّهِ يَقِينَا

Layer: And after forty years of his life with certainty,
And after forty years of his life with certainty,

Layer: نَبِيُّنَا كَعادَتِهْ * فِي الْغَارِ مَعْ عِبَادَتِهْ
نَبِيُّنَا كَعادَتِهْ * فِي الْغَارِ مَعْ عِبَادَتِهْ

Layer: Our Prophet, as was his habit, was in the cave engaged in worship,
Our Prophet, as was his habit, was in the cave engaged in worship,

Layer: إِذْ جَاءَهُ جِبْرِيلُ * بِأَمْرِهِ يَقُولُ
إِذْ جَاءَهُ جِبْرِيلُ * بِأَمْرِهِ يَقُولُ

Layer: When Jibril came to him with the command, saying: “Read,”
When Jibril came to him with the command, saying: “Read,”

Layer: اِقْرَأْ كَمَا فِي الْخَبَرِ * الصَّادِقِ الْمُشْتَهِرِ
اِقْرَأْ كَمَا فِي الْخَبَرِ * الصَّادِقِ الْمُشْتَهِرِ

Layer: As has come in the authentic and well known report.
As has come in the authentic and well known report.

Layer: فَأَخْبَرَ بِمَا جَرَى * خَدِيجَةَ الْمُطَهَّرَا
فَأَخْبَرَ بِمَا جَرَى * خَدِيجَةَ الْمُطَهَّرَا

Layer: So he informed the purified Khadijah of what had happened,
So he informed the purified Khadijah of what had happened,

Layer: وَمَا رَآهُ وَسَمِعْ * وَكَيْفَ خَافَ وَفَزِعْ
وَمَا رَآهُ وَسَمِعْ * وَكَيْفَ خَافَ وَفَزِعْ

Layer: And of what he had seen and heard, and how he had feared and become distressed.
And of what he had seen and heard, and how he had feared and become distressed.

Layer: فَهَدَّأَتْ مِنْ رَوْعِهِ * وَذَكَّرَتْ بِفَضْلِهِ
فَهَدَّأَتْ مِنْ رَوْعِهِ * وَذَكَّرَتْ بِفَضْلِهِ

Layer: So she calmed his fear and reminded him of his virtues.
So she calmed his fear and reminded him of his virtues.

Layer: وَاللَّهِ لَا يُخْزِيكَا * وَالْلَّهُ يَجْتَبِيكَا
وَاللَّهِ لَا يُخْزِيكَا * وَالْلَّهُ يَجْتَبِيكَا

Layer: “By Allah, He will never disgrace you, and Allah will choose you.
“By Allah, He will never disgrace you, and Allah will choose you.

Layer: تَصْدُقُ فِي الْكَلَامِ * مَعْ صِلَةِ الْأَرْحَامِ
تَصْدُقُ فِي الْكَلَامِ * مَعْ صِلَةِ الْأَرْحَامِ

Layer: You speak truthfully, maintain ties of kinship,
You speak truthfully, maintain ties of kinship,

Layer: وَتُكْرِمُ الضُّيُوفَا * وَتُسْعِفُ الْمَلْهُوفَا
وَتُكْرِمُ الضُّيُوفَا * وَتُسْعِفُ الْمَلْهُوفَا

Layer: And you honour guests, and aid the distressed.
And you honour guests, and aid the distressed.

Layer: وَتَكْسِبُ الْمَعْدُومَا * فَالْخَوْفُ لَنْ يَدُومَا
وَتَكْسِبُ الْمَعْدُومَا * فَالْخَوْفُ لَنْ يَدُومَا

Layer: And you provide for those who have nothing, so this fear will not remain.”
And you provide for those who have nothing, so this fear will not remain.”

Layer: وَاصْطَحَبَتْهُ زَوْجُهُ * لِعَالِمٍ تَعْرِفُهُ
وَاصْطَحَبَتْهُ زَوْجُهُ * لِعَالِمٍ تَعْرِفُهُ

Layer: And his wife took him to a learned man whom she knew,
And his wife took him to a learned man whom she knew,

Layer: هُوَ ابْنُ عَمِّهَا الْوَلِي * وَرَقَةُ بْنُ نَوْفَلِ
هُوَ ابْنُ عَمِّهَا الْوَلِي * وَرَقَةُ بْنُ نَوْفَلِ

Layer: Her righteous cousin, Waraqah Ibn Nawfal.
Her righteous cousin, Waraqah Ibn Nawfal.

Layer: فَقالَ مَا الَّذِي تَرَى * يَا ابْنَ أَخِي وَمَا جَرَى
فَقالَ مَا الَّذِي تَرَى * يَا ابْنَ أَخِي وَمَا جَرَى

Layer: So he said: “What is it that you saw, Oh son of my brother, and what happened?
So he said: “What is it that you saw, Oh son of my brother, and what happened?

Layer: حَدِّثْنِي بِالْأَخْبَارِ * وَمَا جَرَى فِي الْغَارِ
حَدِّثْنِي بِالْأَخْبَارِ * وَمَا جَرَى فِي الْغَارِ

Layer: Tell me the news and what occurred in the cave.”
Tell me the news and what occurred in the cave.”

Layer: فَحِينَ قَصَّ مَا جَرَى * قَالَ لَهُ وَأَخْبَرَا
فَحِينَ قَصَّ مَا جَرَى * قَالَ لَهُ وَأَخْبَرَا

Layer: So when he related what had happened, he said to him and informed him:
So when he related what had happened, he said to him and informed him:

Layer: ذَاكَ الْمَلَاكُ الْمُرْسَلُ * لِمُوسَى كَانَ يَنْزِلُ
ذَاكَ الْمَلَاكُ الْمُرْسَلُ * لِمُوسَى كَانَ يَنْزِلُ

Layer: “That is the angelic messenger who used to descend to Musa.”
“That is the angelic messenger who used to descend to Musa.”

Layer: يَا لَيْتَنِي أُدْرِكُكَا * إِذْ يُخْرِجُوكَ قَوْمُكَا
يَا لَيْتَنِي أُدْرِكُكَا * إِذْ يُخْرِجُوكَ قَوْمُكَا

Layer: “I wish that I might live to see the time when your people drive you out.”
“I wish that I might live to see the time when your people drive you out.”

Layer: قَالَ أَمُخْرِجِيَّا * مِنْ بَلْدَتِي الزَّكِيَّا
قَالَ أَمُخْرِجِيَّا * مِنْ بَلْدَتِي الزَّكِيَّا

Layer: He said: “Will they really expel me from my blessed homeland?”
He said: “Will they really expel me from my blessed homeland?”

Layer: قَالَ فَإِنَّ مَنْ أَتَى * بِمِثْلِ هَذَا يَا فَتَى
قَالَ فَإِنَّ مَنْ أَتَى * بِمِثْلِ هَذَا يَا فَتَى

Layer: He replied: “Indeed, whoever comes with something like this, Oh young man,
He replied: “Indeed, whoever comes with something like this, Oh young man,

Layer: فَإِنَّهُ قَدْ أُوذِيَا * فِي دِينِهِ وَعُودِيَا
فَإِنَّهُ قَدْ أُوذِيَا * فِي دِينِهِ وَعُودِيَا

Layer: Will surely be harmed for his religion and treated with hostility.”
Will surely be harmed for his religion and treated with hostility.”

Layer: أوَّلُ مَنْ آمَنَ بِهْ * زَوْجَتُهُ مَعْ صَاحِبِهْ
أوَّلُ مَنْ آمَنَ بِهْ * زَوْجَتُهُ مَعْ صَاحِبِهْ

Layer: The first to believe in him were his wife and his companion,
The first to believe in him were his wife and his companion,

Layer: وَزَيْدٌ الْوَلِيُّ * عَلِيٌّ الصَّبِيُّ
وَزَيْدٌ الْوَلِيُّ * عَلِيٌّ الصَّبِيُّ

Layer: And Zayd, the righteous one, and Ali, the young boy.
And Zayd, the righteous one, and Ali, the young boy.

Layer: بِلَالٌ الرَّقِيقُ * أَعْتَقَهُ الصِّدِّيقُ
بِلَالٌ الرَّقِيقُ * أَعْتَقَهُ الصِّدِّيقُ

Layer: And Bilal, the slave, whom As-Sediq set free.
And Bilal, the slave, whom As-Sediq set free.

Layer: وَثُلَّةٌ قَدْ بُشِّرُوا * بِجَنَّةٍ وَأُخْبِرُوا
وَثُلَّةٌ قَدْ بُشِّرُوا * بِجَنَّةٍ وَأُخْبِرُوا

Layer: And a group who were given glad tidings and informed of Paradise.
And a group who were given glad tidings and informed of Paradise.

Layer: فِي دَعْوَةٍ سِرِّيَّةْ * وَلَمْ تَكُنْ جَهْرِيَّةْ
فِي دَعْوَةٍ سِرِّيَّةْ * وَلَمْ تَكُنْ جَهْرِيَّةْ

Layer: The call was at first kept secret and not made openly.
The call was at first kept secret and not made openly.

Layer: وَبَعْدَهَا قَدْ أُمِرَا * لِقَوْمِهِ أَنْ يُنْذِرَا
وَبَعْدَهَا قَدْ أُمِرَا * لِقَوْمِهِ أَنْ يُنْذِرَا

Layer: Then after that, he was commanded to warn his people.
Then after that, he was commanded to warn his people.

Layer: فَاجْتَمَعُوا عَلَى الصَّفَا * وَاسْتَمَعُوا لِلْمُصْطَفَى
فَاجْتَمَعُوا عَلَى الصَّفَا * وَاسْتَمَعُوا لِلْمُصْطَفَى

Layer: So they gathered upon Al-Safa and listened to the Chosen One.
So they gathered upon Al-Safa and listened to the Chosen One.

Layer: فَقالَ يَا عَشِيرَتِي * جَمِيعُكُمْ حَتَّى ابْنَتِي
فَقالَ يَا عَشِيرَتِي * جَمِيعُكُمْ حَتَّى ابْنَتِي

Layer: He said: “Oh my clan, all of you, even my own daughter,
He said: “Oh my clan, all of you, even my own daughter,

Layer: لَا أُغْنِي عَنكُمْ فَاعْبُدُوا * إِلَهَكُمْ وَوَحِّدُوا 
لَا أُغْنِي عَنكُمْ فَاعْبُدُوا * إِلَهَكُمْ وَوَحِّدُوا

Layer: I cannot avail you against Allah, so worship your Lord and affirm His oneness.
I cannot avail you against Allah, so worship your Lord and affirm His oneness.

Layer: فَسَبَّهُ أَبُو لَهَبْ * لِأَجْلِ ذَلِكَ السَّبَبْ 
فَسَبَّهُ أَبُو لَهَبْ * لِأَجْلِ ذَلِكَ السَّبَبْ

Layer: So Abu Lahab insulted him because of that reason.
So Abu Lahab insulted him because of that reason.

Layer: تَبَّتْ يَدَا أَبِي لَهَبْ * سَيَصْلَى فِي النَّارِ اللَّهَبْ
تَبَّتْ يَدَا أَبِي لَهَبْ * سَيَصْلَى فِي النَّارِ اللَّهَبْ

Layer: May the hands of Abu Lahab perish, he will burn in the blazing Fire.
May the hands of Abu Lahab perish, he will burn in the blazing Fire.

Layer: وَأَهْلُ مَكَّ كَذَّبُوا * نَبِيَّهُمْ وَعَذَّبُوا
وَأَهْلُ مَكَّ كَذَّبُوا * نَبِيَّهُمْ وَعَذَّبُوا

Layer: And the people of Makkah denied their Prophet and tortured
And the people of Makkah denied their Prophet and tortured

Layer: قَوْمًا ضِعَافًا أَسْلَمُوا * لَكِنَّهُمْ لَمْ يَسْلَمُوا
قَوْمًا ضِعَافًا أَسْلَمُوا * لَكِنَّهُمْ لَمْ يَسْلَمُوا

Layer: Weak people who had accepted Islam, but they were not safe.
Weak people who had accepted Islam, but they were not safe.

Layer: فَهَاجَرُوا لِلْحَبَشَا * مِن بَعْدِ أَنْ تَفَاحَشَا
فَهَاجَرُوا لِلْحَبَشَا * مِن بَعْدِ أَنْ تَفَاحَشَا

Layer: So they migrated to Abyssinia after the persecution
So they migrated to Abyssinia after the persecution

Layer: عَذَابَهُمْ وَازْدَادَا * وَٱللهُ قَدْ أَرَادَا
عَذَابَهُمْ وَازْدَادَا * وَٱللهُ قَدْ أَرَادَا

Layer: Had become severe and increased, and Allah had willed it.
Had become severe and increased, and Allah had willed it.

Layer: عِندَ النَّجَاشِي سَكَنُوا * بِلَادَهُ وَأَمِنُوا
عِندَ النَّجَاشِي سَكَنُوا * بِلَادَهُ وَأَمِنُوا

Layer: They settled with the Negus in his land and found safety.
They settled with the Negus in his land and found safety.

Layer: وَبَعْدَ إِسْلَامِ عُمَرْ * وَحَمْزَةٍ أَتَى الظَّفَرْ
وَبَعْدَ إِسْلَامِ عُمَرْ * وَحَمْزَةٍ أَتَى الظَّفَرْ

Layer: And after the acceptance of Islam by Umar and Hamzah, victory came,
And after the acceptance of Islam by Umar and Hamzah, victory came,

Layer: إِذْ أَصْبَحُوا أَعِزَّةْ * مَعْ عُمَرٍ وَحَمْزَةْ
إِذْ أَصْبَحُوا أَعِزَّةْ * مَعْ عُمَرٍ وَحَمْزَةْ

Layer: As the Muslims became strengthened through Umar and Hamzah.
As the Muslims became strengthened through Umar and Hamzah.

Layer: وَبَعْدَهَا انْشَقَّ الْقَمَرْ * فَقَالُوا سِحْرٌ مُسْتَمِرّ
وَبَعْدَهَا انْشَقَّ الْقَمَرْ * فَقَالُوا سِحْرٌ مُسْتَمِرّ

Layer: And after that, the moon split, but they said: “Ongoing magic.”
And after that, the moon split, but they said: “Ongoing magic.”

Layer: وَحَاوَلُوا مِرَارَا * أَنْ يَقْتُلُوا الْمُخْتَارَا
وَحَاوَلُوا مِرَارَا * أَنْ يَقْتُلُوا الْمُخْتَارَا

Layer: And they repeatedly attempted to kill the Chosen One.
And they repeatedly attempted to kill the Chosen One.

Layer: وَأَعْلَنُوا الْعِدَاءَا * لِمَن أَبَى الْوَلَاءَا
وَأَعْلَنُوا الْعِدَاءَا * لِمَن أَبَى الْوَلَاءَا

Layer: And they openly declared hostility against whoever refused loyalty to them.
And they openly declared hostility against whoever refused loyalty to them.

Layer: وَحَاصَرُوا النَّبِيَّا * الطَّاهِرَ الرَّضِيَّا
وَحَاصَرُوا النَّبِيَّا * الطَّاهِرَ الرَّضِيَّا

Layer: And they besieged the pure and noble Prophet,
And they besieged the pure and noble Prophet,

Layer: مَعْ قَوْمِهِ فِي الشِّعْبِ * فِي شِدَّةٍ وَكَرْبِ
مَعْ قَوْمِهِ فِي الشِّعْبِ * فِي شِدَّةٍ وَكَرْبِ

Layer: Along with his people in the valley, in hardship and distress.
Along with his people in the valley, in hardship and distress.

Layer: لِمُدَّةٍ وَانْتَقَضَا * عَهْدُهُمْ وَقُوِّضَا
لِمُدَّةٍ وَانْتَقَضَا * عَهْدُهُمْ وَقُوِّضَا

Layer: For a period, until their pact was broken and destroyed.
For a period, until their pact was broken and destroyed.

Layer: وَفِيهِ مَاتَ عَمُّهُ * وَبَعْدَهُ زَوْجَتُهُ
وَفِيهِ مَاتَ عَمُّهُ * وَبَعْدَهُ زَوْجَتُهُ

Layer: And during it, his uncle died, and after him, his wife also died.
And during it, his uncle died, and after him, his wife also died.

Layer: نَبِيُّنَا تَنَقَّلَا * بَيْنَ الْوَرَى كَي يَنْقُلَا
نَبِيُّنَا تَنَقَّلَا * بَيْنَ الْوَرَى كَي يَنْقُلَا

Layer: Our Prophet moved among the people so that he might convey
Our Prophet moved among the people so that he might convey

Layer: فِي النَّاسِ مَا قَدْ أُمِرَا * بِنَشْرِهِ بَيْنَ الْوَرَى
فِي النَّاسِ مَا قَدْ أُمِرَا * بِنَشْرِهِ بَيْنَ الْوَرَى

Layer: Among mankind what he had been commanded to spread.
Among mankind what he had been commanded to spread.

Layer: حَتَّى أَتَى ثَقِيفَا * فَكَذَّبُوا الشَّرِيفَا
حَتَّى أَتَى ثَقِيفَا * فَكَذَّبُوا الشَّرِيفَا

Layer: Until he came to Thaqif, but they denied the noble one.
Until he came to Thaqif, but they denied the noble one.

Layer: وَجَاءَ جِنٌّ أَسْلَمُوا * لِرَبِّهِمْ وَسَلَّمُوا
وَجَاءَ جِنٌّ أَسْلَمُوا * لِرَبِّهِمْ وَسَلَّمُوا

Layer: And a group of jinn came who accepted Islam and submitted to their Lord.
And a group of jinn came who accepted Islam and submitted to their Lord.

Layer: وَبَعْدَهَا قَدْ أُسْرِيَا * بِهِ فَلَاقَى الْأَنْبِيَا
وَبَعْدَهَا قَدْ أُسْرِيَا * بِهِ فَلَاقَى الْأَنْبِيَا

Layer: After that, he was taken by night, and he met the prophets.
After that, he was taken by night, and he met the prophets.

Layer: ثُمَّ عُرُوجًا لِلسَّمَا * وَرَبَّهُ قَدْ كَلَّمَا
ثُمَّ عُرُوجًا لِلسَّمَا * وَرَبَّهُ قَدْ كَلَّمَا

Layer: Then he ascended to the heavens, and he spoke to his Lord.
Then he ascended to the heavens, and he spoke to his Lord.

Layer: ثُمَّ الصَّلَاةُ افْتُرِضَتْ * فِي الْيَوْمِ خَمْسٌ ثَبَتَتْ
ثُمَّ الصَّلَاةُ افْتُرِضَتْ * فِي الْيَوْمِ خَمْسٌ ثَبَتَتْ

Layer: Then the prayer was made obligatory, five each day were established.
Then the prayer was made obligatory, five each day were established.

Layer: وَبَعْدَ ذَاكَ انْتَقَلَا * إِلَى مِنًى وَقَابَلَا
وَبَعْدَ ذَاكَ انْتَقَلَا * إِلَى مِنًى وَقَابَلَا

Layer: After that, he went to Mina and met
After that, he went to Mina and met

Layer: وَفْدًا مِنَ الْأَنْصَارِ * لِبَيْعَةِ الْمُخْتَارِ
وَفْدًا مِنَ الْأَنْصَارِ * لِبَيْعَةِ الْمُخْتَارِ

Layer: A delegation from the Ansar for the pledge to the Chosen One,
A delegation from the Ansar for the pledge to the Chosen One,

Layer: لِيَنْصُرُوا النَّبِيَّا * فِي طَيْبَةَ الْأَبِيَّا
لِيَنْصُرُوا النَّبِيَّا * فِي طَيْبَةَ الْأَبِيَّا

Layer: So that they support the Prophet in noble Taybah [Madinah].
So that they support the Prophet in noble Taybah [Madinah].

Layer: فَجَاءَ أَمْرُ الْهِجْرَةِ * لِكُلِّ مَنْ ذِي قُدْرَةِ
فَجَاءَ أَمْرُ الْهِجْرَةِ * لِكُلِّ مَنْ ذِي قُدْرَةِ

Layer: Then came the command for migration for everyone who was able.
Then came the command for migration for everyone who was able.

Layer: وَاسْتَأْخَرَ الصِّدِّيقُ * الْمُشْفِقُ الرَّفِيقُ
وَاسْتَأْخَرَ الصِّدِّيقُ * الْمُشْفِقُ الرَّفِيقُ

Layer: And the truthful, compassionate companion remained behind,
And the truthful, compassionate companion remained behind,

Layer: لِصُحْبَةِ الْمُخْتَارِ * فِي سَائِرِ الْأَسْفَارِ
لِصُحْبَةِ الْمُخْتَارِ * فِي سَائِرِ الْأَسْفَارِ

Layer: So he could accompany the Chosen One on all journeys.
So he could accompany the Chosen One on all journeys.

Layer: تَصَاحَبَا فِي الْهِجْرَةْ * لِيُعلِ اللهُ قَدْرَهْ 
تَصَاحَبَا فِي الْهِجْرَةْ * لِيُعلِ اللهُ قَدْرَهْ

Layer: So the two travelled together in the migration, so that Allah might raise his rank.
So the two travelled together in the migration, so that Allah might raise his rank.

Layer: نَبِيُّنَا الْمُخْتَارُ * قَابَلَهُ الْأَنْصَارُ 
نَبِيُّنَا الْمُخْتَارُ * قَابَلَهُ الْأَنْصَارُ

Layer: Our Prophet, the Chosen One, was welcomed by the Ansar
Our Prophet, the Chosen One, was welcomed by the Ansar

Layer: بِالْبِشْرِ وَالسُّرُورِ * وَالْحُبِّ وَالْحُبُورِ 
بِالْبِشْرِ وَالسُّرُورِ * وَالْحُبِّ وَالْحُبُورِ

Layer: With joy and happiness, with love and delight.
With joy and happiness, with love and delight.

Layer: أَوَّلُ شَيْءٍ قَدْ فَعَلْ * نَبِيُّنَا لَمَّا وَصَلْ 
أَوَّلُ شَيْءٍ قَدْ فَعَلْ * نَبِيُّنَا لَمَّا وَصَلْ

Layer: The first thing our Prophet did when he arrived
The first thing our Prophet did when he arrived

Layer: بِنَاؤُهُ قُبَاءَ * فَأَحْكَمَ الْبِنَاءَ 
بِنَاؤُهُ قُبَاءَ * فَأَحْكَمَ الْبِنَاءَ

Layer: Was the building of Quba, and he perfected its construction.
Was the building of Quba, and he perfected its construction.

Layer: ثُمَّ بِنَاءُ مَسْجِدِ * خَيْرِ الْوَرَى مُحَمَّدِ 
ثُمَّ بِنَاءُ مَسْجِدِ * خَيْرِ الْوَرَى مُحَمَّدِ

Layer: Then came the building of the mosque of Muhammad, the best of mankind.
Then came the building of the mosque of Muhammad, the best of mankind.

Layer: مَنْزِلُهُ فِي الطَّرَفِ * بِالْحُجُرَاتِ تُعْرَفِ
مَنْزِلُهُ فِي الطَّرَفِ * بِالْحُجُرَاتِ تُعْرَفِ

Layer: His dwelling was at the edge, known as the chambers.
His dwelling was at the edge, known as the chambers.

Layer: وَآخَى بَيْنَ إِخْوَةٍ * مُهَاجِرِينَ صَفْوَةٍ
وَآخَى بَيْنَ إِخْوَةٍ * مُهَاجِرِينَ صَفْوَةٍ

Layer: And he established brotherhood between noble emigrant brothers
And he established brotherhood between noble emigrant brothers

Layer: وَإِخْوَةٍ أَنْصَارِ * صَحَابَةٍ أَخْيَارِ
وَإِخْوَةٍ أَنْصَارِ * صَحَابَةٍ أَخْيَارِ

Layer: And the Ansar brothers, the righteous companions.
And the Ansar brothers, the righteous companions.

Layer: وَبَعْدَهَا قَدْ دَخَلَا * بِعَائِشَ الْمُفَضَّلَا
وَبَعْدَهَا قَدْ دَخَلَا * بِعَائِشَ الْمُفَضَّلَا

Layer: After that, he consummated his marriage with the honoured Aishah.
After that, he consummated his marriage with the honoured Aishah.

Layer: وَعَاهَدَ الْيَهُودَا * وَاسْتَوْثَقَ الْعُهُودَا
وَعَاهَدَ الْيَهُودَا * وَاسْتَوْثَقَ الْعُهُودَا

Layer: And he made treaties with the Jews and firmly established the agreements.
And he made treaties with the Jews and firmly established the agreements.

Layer: فَرْضُ الصِّيَامِ قَدْ أَتَى * مَعَ الزَّكَاةِ يَا فَتَى
فَرْضُ الصِّيَامِ قَدْ أَتَى * مَعَ الزَّكَاةِ يَا فَتَى

Layer: The obligation of fasting came, along with zakah, Oh young man.
The obligation of fasting came, along with zakah, Oh young man.

Layer: ثُمَّ الأَذَانُ شُرِعَا * وَالخَمْرُ أَيْضًا مُنِعَا
ثُمَّ الأَذَانُ شُرِعَا * وَالخَمْرُ أَيْضًا مُنِعَا

Layer: Then the call to prayer was legislated, and wine was also forbidden.
Then the call to prayer was legislated, and wine was also forbidden.

Layer: تَحَوَّلُوا لِلْقِبْلَةِ * أَعْنِي تِجَاهَ الْكَعْبَةِ
تَحَوَّلُوا لِلْقِبْلَةِ * أَعْنِي تِجَاهَ الْكَعْبَةِ

Layer: They turned towards the qiblah, meaning towards the Kaabah.
They turned towards the qiblah, meaning towards the Kaabah.

Layer: بَقِيَّةُ الْأَحْكَامِ * فِي سَائِرِ الْأَعْوَامِ
بَقِيَّةُ الْأَحْكَامِ * فِي سَائِرِ الْأَعْوَامِ

Layer: And the rest of the rulings came throughout the following years.
And the rest of the rulings came throughout the following years.

Layer: زَوْجَاتُهُ إِحْدَى عَشَرْ * فِيمَا رَوَوهُ وَاشْتَهَرْ
زَوْجَاتُهُ إِحْدَى عَشَرْ * فِيمَا رَوَوهُ وَاشْتَهَرْ

Layer: His wives were eleven, according to what has been narrated and well known:
His wives were eleven, according to what has been narrated and well known:

Layer: خَدِيجَةٌ فَسَوْدَةُ * عَائِشَةٌ فَحَفْصَةُ
خَدِيجَةٌ فَسَوْدَةُ * عَائِشَةٌ فَحَفْصَةُ

Layer: Khadijah, then Sawdah, Aishah, then Hafsah,
Khadijah, then Sawdah, Aishah, then Hafsah,

Layer: وَزَيْنَبٌ وَرَمْلَةُ * مَيْمُونَةٌ صَفِيَّةُ
وَزَيْنَبٌ وَرَمْلَةُ * مَيْمُونَةٌ صَفِيَّةُ

Layer: And Zaynab, and Ramlah, Maymunah, and Safiyyah,
And Zaynab, and Ramlah, Maymunah, and Safiyyah,

Layer: وَهِنْدٌ أَمَّ التَّالِيَةْ * زَوْجَتُهُ جُوَيْرِيَةْ 
وَهِنْدٌ أَمَّ التَّالِيَةْ * زَوْجَتُهُ جُوَيْرِيَةْ

Layer: And Hind, and the next one is his wife Juwayriyyah,
And Hind, and the next one is his wife Juwayriyyah,

Layer: بِنْتُ خُزَيْمَ زَيْنَبُ * وَبِنْتُ جَحْشٍ زَيْنَبُ 
بِنْتُ خُزَيْمَ زَيْنَبُ * وَبِنْتُ جَحْشٍ زَيْنَبُ

Layer: Zaynab bint Khuzaymah, and Zaynab bint Jahsh.
Zaynab bint Khuzaymah, and Zaynab bint Jahsh.

Layer: أَوْلَادُهُ فَسَبْعَةٌ * بَنَاتُهُ أَرْبَعَةٌ 
أَوْلَادُهُ فَسَبْعَةٌ * بَنَاتُهُ أَرْبَعَةٌ

Layer: His children were seven, and his daughters were four:
His children were seven, and his daughters were four:

Layer: فَزَيْنَبٌ فِي الأَوَّلِ * وَأُمُّ كُلْثُومٍ تَلِي
فَزَيْنَبٌ فِي الأَوَّلِ * وَأُمُّ كُلْثُومٍ تَلِي

Layer: Zaynab was the first, followed by Umm Kulthum,
Zaynab was the first, followed by Umm Kulthum,

Layer: رُقَيَّةٌ وَبَعْدَهَا * فَاطِمَةٌ خِتَامُهَا
رُقَيَّةٌ وَبَعْدَهَا * فَاطِمَةٌ خِتَامُهَا

Layer: Then Ruqayyah, and after her Fatimah, the last of them.
Then Ruqayyah, and after her Fatimah, the last of them.

Layer: أَمَّا الذُّكُورُ إِنَّهُمْ * فَقَاسِمٌ أَوَّلُهُمْ
أَمَّا الذُّكُورُ إِنَّهُمْ * فَقَاسِمٌ أَوَّلُهُمْ

Layer: As for the sons, the first of them was Qasim,
As for the sons, the first of them was Qasim,

Layer: وَعَبْدُ اللَّهِ الطَّاهِرُ * مَعَ ابْرَاهِيمَ أَذْكُرُ
وَعَبْدُ اللَّهِ الطَّاهِرُ * مَعَ ابْرَاهِيمَ أَذْكُرُ

Layer: And Abdullah the pure, and I also mention Ibrahim.
And Abdullah the pure, and I also mention Ibrahim.

Layer: قَدْ مَاتُوا فِي حَيَاتِهِ * فَاطِمَةٌ مِنْ بَعْدِهِ
قَدْ مَاتُوا فِي حَيَاتِهِ * فَاطِمَةٌ مِنْ بَعْدِهِ

Layer: They all died during his lifetime, except Fatimah, who died after him.
They all died during his lifetime, except Fatimah, who died after him.

Layer: غَزْوَاتُهُ فِيْمَا ذُكِرْ * وَمَا رَوَوهُ وَاشْتَهَرْ
غَزْوَاتُهُ فِيْمَا ذُكِرْ * وَمَا رَوَوهُ وَاشْتَهَرْ

Layer: His battles, according to what has been mentioned, narrated, and well known:
His battles, according to what has been mentioned, narrated, and well known:

Layer: غَزْوَةُ بَدْرٍ وَانْتَصَرَ * فِيهَا النَّبِيُّ وَانْكَسَرَ
غَزْوَةُ بَدْرٍ وَانْتَصَرَ * فِيهَا النَّبِيُّ وَانْكَسَرَ

Layer: The Battle of Badr, in which the Prophet was victorious, and
The Battle of Badr, in which the Prophet was victorious, and

Layer: جَيْشٌ لِأَهْلِ مَكَّةْ * فِي رَمَضَانَ دَكَّهْ
جَيْشٌ لِأَهْلِ مَكَّةْ * فِي رَمَضَانَ دَكَّهْ

Layer: An army of the people of Makkah was defeated in Ramadan.
An army of the people of Makkah was defeated in Ramadan.

Layer: وَبَعْدَهَا الْجَيْشُ انْهَزَمْ * فِي أُحُدٍ وَمَا سَلِمْ
وَبَعْدَهَا الْجَيْشُ انْهَزَمْ * فِي أُحُدٍ وَمَا سَلِمْ

Layer: After that, the army was defeated at Uhud and did not remain unharmed,
After that, the army was defeated at Uhud and did not remain unharmed,

Layer: جُلُّ الرُّمَاةِ نَزَلُوا * وَأَمْرَهُ مَا امْتَثَلُوا
جُلُّ الرُّمَاةِ نَزَلُوا * وَأَمْرَهُ مَا امْتَثَلُوا

Layer: Because most of the archers came down and did not obey his command.
Because most of the archers came down and did not obey his command.

Layer: فَكَانَتِ الْهَزِيمَةْ * شَدِيدَةً أَلِيمَةْ
فَكَانَتِ الْهَزِيمَةْ * شَدِيدَةً أَلِيمَةْ

Layer: So the defeat was severe and painful.
So the defeat was severe and painful.

Layer: أَتَتْ بَنُو النَّضِيرِ * بِالْعَمَلِ الْحَقِيرِ
أَتَتْ بَنُو النَّضِيرِ * بِالْعَمَلِ الْحَقِيرِ

Layer: Then Banu Al-Nadir committed a vile act,
Then Banu Al-Nadir committed a vile act,

Layer: وَهَمُّوا بِالْغَدْرِ كَمَا * عَنْ قَوْمِهِمْ قَدْ عُلِمَا
وَهَمُّوا بِالْغَدْرِ كَمَا * عَنْ قَوْمِهِمْ قَدْ عُلِمَا

Layer: And intended treachery, as was known from their people.
And intended treachery, as was known from their people.

Layer: نَبِيُّنَا أَجْلَاهُمْ * لِلشَّامِ قَدْ نَفَاهُمْ
نَبِيُّنَا أَجْلَاهُمْ * لِلشَّامِ قَدْ نَفَاهُمْ

Layer: So our Prophet expelled them and banished them to Al-Sham.
So our Prophet expelled them and banished them to Al-Sham.

Layer: وَبَعْدَهَا الْأَحْزَابُ * فِي سَعْيِهِمْ قَدْ خَابُوا
وَبَعْدَهَا الْأَحْزَابُ * فِي سَعْيِهِمْ قَدْ خَابُوا

Layer: And after that came the Confederates, but they failed in their efforts.
And after that came the Confederates, but they failed in their efforts.

Layer: وَأَبْصَرُوا الْمَدِينَةْ * بِخَنْدَقٍ حَصِينَةْ
وَأَبْصَرُوا الْمَدِينَةْ * بِخَنْدَقٍ حَصِينَةْ

Layer: And they saw Madinah fortified with a trench.
And they saw Madinah fortified with a trench.

Layer: وَجَيْشُهُمْ تَرَاجَعَا * بِالرِّيحِ وَالرُّعْبِ مَعَا
وَجَيْشُهُمْ تَرَاجَعَا * بِالرِّيحِ وَالرُّعْبِ مَعَا

Layer: Their army retreated, struck by wind and fear together.
Their army retreated, struck by wind and fear together.

Layer: قَدْ نَقَضَتْ قُرَيْظَةْ * عُهُودَهَا الْعَرِيضَةْ
قَدْ نَقَضَتْ قُرَيْظَةْ * عُهُودَهَا الْعَرِيضَةْ

Layer: Qurayzah had broken their strong covenant,
Qurayzah had broken their strong covenant,

Layer: إِذْ حَالَفُوا الأَحْزَابَا * وَجَانَبُوا الصَّوَابَا
إِذْ حَالَفُوا الأَحْزَابَا * وَجَانَبُوا الصَّوَابَا

Layer: As they allied with the Confederates and abandoned what was right.
As they allied with the Confederates and abandoned what was right.

Layer: فَقُتِّلُوا لِغَدْرِهِمْ * وَخُبْثِهِمْ وَمَكْرِهِمْ
فَقُتِّلُوا لِغَدْرِهِمْ * وَخُبْثِهِمْ وَمَكْرِهِمْ

Layer: So they were killed because of their treachery, evil, and plotting.
So they were killed because of their treachery, evil, and plotting.

Layer: وَبَعْدَهَا الْحُدَيْبِيَا * فَكَانَ صُلْحًا قَاضِيَا
وَبَعْدَهَا الْحُدَيْبِيَا * فَكَانَ صُلْحًا قَاضِيَا

Layer: After that came Al-Hudaybiyyah, which became a decisive treaty.
After that came Al-Hudaybiyyah, which became a decisive treaty.

Layer: بُنُودُهُ قَدْ شُهِرَتْ * وَبِالْعُهُودِ سُطِّرَتْ
بُنُودُهُ قَدْ شُهِرَتْ * وَبِالْعُهُودِ سُطِّرَتْ

Layer: Its conditions became well known and were written as binding agreements.
Its conditions became well known and were written as binding agreements.

Layer: وَبَعْدَهَا فَخَيْبَرُ * قَدْ خَرِبَتْ وَانْدَحَرُوا
وَبَعْدَهَا فَخَيْبَرُ * قَدْ خَرِبَتْ وَانْدَحَرُوا

Layer: Then after that came Khaybar, it was ruined and they were defeated.
Then after that came Khaybar, it was ruined and they were defeated.

Layer: وَخَانَتِ الْيَهُودُ * وَضَاعَتِ الْعُهُودُ
وَخَانَتِ الْيَهُودُ * وَضَاعَتِ الْعُهُودُ

Layer: And the Jews betrayed, and the agreements were lost.
And the Jews betrayed, and the agreements were lost.

Layer: وَبَعْدَهَا فِي مَكَّةَ * فَتْحٌ عَظِيمٌ أُثْبِتَا
وَبَعْدَهَا فِي مَكَّةَ * فَتْحٌ عَظِيمٌ أُثْبِتَا

Layer: Then after that, in Makkah, a tremendous conquest was established.
Then after that, in Makkah, a tremendous conquest was established.

Layer: أُبِيحَ لِلْمُخْتَارِ * وَقْتًا مِنَ النَّهَارِ
أُبِيحَ لِلْمُخْتَارِ * وَقْتًا مِنَ النَّهَارِ

Layer: It [fighting] was made lawful for the Chosen One for a portion of the day.
It [fighting] was made lawful for the Chosen One for a portion of the day.

Layer: وَجَاءَ جَيْشُ اللهِ * يُذِلُّ كُلَّ لَاهِ
وَجَاءَ جَيْشُ اللهِ * يُذِلُّ كُلَّ لَاهِ

Layer: And the army of Allah came, humiliating every arrogant one.
And the army of Allah came, humiliating every arrogant one.

Layer: وَفِي حُنَيْنٍ قَدْ ظَفِرْ * جَيْشُ النَّبِيِّ وَانْتَصَرْ
وَفِي حُنَيْنٍ قَدْ ظَفِرْ * جَيْشُ النَّبِيِّ وَانْتَصَرْ

Layer: And at Hunayn, the army of the Prophet prevailed and was victorious.
And at Hunayn, the army of the Prophet prevailed and was victorious.

Layer: وَالنَّصْرُ جَاءَ بَعْدَمَا * أَوْشَكَ أَنْ يَنْهَزِمَا
وَالنَّصْرُ جَاءَ بَعْدَمَا * أَوْشَكَ أَنْ يَنْهَزِمَا

Layer: Victory came after they had nearly been defeated.
Victory came after they had nearly been defeated.

Layer: آخِرُهَا فَأَثْبِتِ * غَزْوَةُ جَيْشِ الْعُسْرَةِ
آخِرُهَا فَأَثْبِتِ * غَزْوَةُ جَيْشِ الْعُسْرَةِ

Layer: The last of them, so affirm it, was the expedition of the Army of Hardship.
The last of them, so affirm it, was the expedition of the Army of Hardship.

Layer: إِلَى تَبُوكٍ سَارَا * يُطَهِّرُ الْدِّيَارَا
إِلَى تَبُوكٍ سَارَا * يُطَهِّرُ الْدِّيَارَا

Layer: He travelled to Tabuk, purifying the lands.
He travelled to Tabuk, purifying the lands.

Layer: وَبَعْدَهَا الْوَدَاعُ * فِي حَجَّةٍ تُذَاعُ
وَبَعْدَهَا الْوَدَاعُ * فِي حَجَّةٍ تُذَاعُ

Layer: After that came the Farewell Pilgrimage, whose events became widely known,
After that came the Farewell Pilgrimage, whose events became widely known,

Layer: أَحْدَاثُهَا قَدْ شُهِرَتْ * وَفِي الْحَدِيثِ ذُكِرَتْ
أَحْدَاثُهَا قَدْ شُهِرَتْ * وَفِي الْحَدِيثِ ذُكِرَتْ

Layer: And were mentioned in the narrations.
And were mentioned in the narrations.

Layer: الْيَوْمَ أَكْمَلْتُ لَكُمْ * بِهَا تَمَامُ دِينِكُمْ
الْيَوْمَ أَكْمَلْتُ لَكُمْ * بِهَا تَمَامُ دِينِكُمْ

Layer: “Today I have perfected for you your religion.”
“Today I have perfected for you your religion.”

Layer: فِي عَامِهِ الْحَادِي عَشَرْ * فِي يَوْمِهِ الثَّانِي عَشَرْ
فِي عَامِهِ الْحَادِي عَشَرْ * فِي يَوْمِهِ الثَّانِي عَشَرْ

Layer: In the eleventh year, on the twelfth day,
In the eleventh year, on the twelfth day,

Layer: وَفِي رَبِيعِ الأَوَّلِ * وَفَاةُ خَيْرِ الرُّسُلِ
وَفِي رَبِيعِ الأَوَّلِ * وَفَاةُ خَيْرِ الرُّسُلِ

Layer: In the month of Rabi Al-Awwal, occurred the death of the best of messengers.
In the month of Rabi Al-Awwal, occurred the death of the best of messengers.

Layer: أَظْلَمَتِ الْمَدِينَةْ * وَأَصْبَحَتْ حَزِينَةْ
أَظْلَمَتِ الْمَدِينَةْ * وَأَصْبَحَتْ حَزِينَةْ

Layer: Madinah became darkened and filled with grief.
Madinah became darkened and filled with grief.

Layer: وَقَدْ بَكَى الْجَمِيعُ * وَانْهَالَتِ الدُّمُوعُ
وَقَدْ بَكَى الْجَمِيعُ * وَانْهَالَتِ الدُّمُوعُ

Layer: Everyone wept, and tears poured forth,
Everyone wept, and tears poured forth,

Layer: لِفَقْدِ ذَاكَ الْهَادِي * مَنْ شَرَّفِ النَّوَادِي
لِفَقْدِ ذَاكَ الْهَادِي * مَنْ شَرَّفِ النَّوَادِي

Layer: Over the loss of that guide, the one who honoured gatherings.
Over the loss of that guide, the one who honoured gatherings.

Layer: وَبَعْدَ مَا قَدْ كُفِّنَا * نَبِيُّنَا قَدْ دُفِنَا
وَبَعْدَ مَا قَدْ كُفِّنَا * نَبِيُّنَا قَدْ دُفِنَا

Layer: And after our Prophet was shrouded, he was buried
And after our Prophet was shrouded, he was buried

Layer: فِي حُجْرَةِ الصَّدِيقَةْ * عَائِشَةَ الشَّفِيقَةْ
فِي حُجْرَةِ الصَّدِيقَةْ * عَائِشَةَ الشَّفِيقَةْ

Layer: In the chamber of the truthful and compassionate Aishah.
In the chamber of the truthful and compassionate Aishah.

Layer: وَبُويِعَ الصِّدِّيقُ * الرَّجُلُ الرَّفِيقُ
وَبُويِعَ الصِّدِّيقُ * الرَّجُلُ الرَّفِيقُ

Layer: Then As-Sediq was pledged allegiance to, the gentle and loyal man,
Then As-Sediq was pledged allegiance to, the gentle and loyal man,

Layer: إِذْ كَانَ أَوْلَى الْأُمَّةْ * لِمَنْصِبٍ أَتَمَّهْ
إِذْ كَانَ أَوْلَى الْأُمَّةْ * لِمَنْصِبٍ أَتَمَّهْ

Layer: As he was the most deserving in the nation for the position that was entrusted to him.
As he was the most deserving in the nation for the position that was entrusted to him.

Layer: وَتَمَّ مَا نَظَمْتُ * فِي شَأْنِ مَن أَحْبَبْتُ
وَتَمَّ مَا نَظَمْتُ * فِي شَأْنِ مَن أَحْبَبْتُ

Layer: And thus is completed what I composed concerning the one whom I love,
And thus is completed what I composed concerning the one whom I love,

Layer: الْمُصْطَفَى خَيْرِ الْبَشَرْ * مُحَمَّدِ الشَّهْمِ الْأَغَرْ
الْمُصْطَفَى خَيْرِ الْبَشَرْ * مُحَمَّدِ الشَّهْمِ الْأَغَرْ

Layer: The Chosen One, the best of mankind, Muhammad, the noble and radiant one.
The Chosen One, the best of mankind, Muhammad, the noble and radiant one.

Layer: أَرْجُو مِنَ اللَّهِ الْعَلِي * غُفْرَانَ كُلِّ الزَّلَلِ
أَرْجُو مِنَ اللَّهِ الْعَلِي * غُفْرَانَ كُلِّ الزَّلَلِ

Layer: I ask Allah, the Most High, for forgiveness for every mistake,
I ask Allah, the Most High, for forgiveness for every mistake,

Layer: وَرُؤْيَةَ الرَّحِيمِ * وَوَجْهُهُ الْعَظِيمِ
وَرُؤْيَةَ الرَّحِيمِ * وَوَجْهُهُ الْعَظِيمِ

Layer: And to see the Most Merciful and His majestic Face,
And to see the Most Merciful and His majestic Face,

Layer: وَصُحْبَةَ النَّبِيِّ * الطَّاهِرِ الزَّكِيِّ
وَصُحْبَةَ النَّبِيِّ * الطَّاهِرِ الزَّكِيِّ

Layer: And for the companionship of the pure and noble Prophet.
And for the companionship of the pure and noble Prophet.

Layer: يَا رَبِّ صَلِّ أَبَدَا * عَلَى النَّبِيِّ أَحْمَدَا
يَا رَبِّ صَلِّ أَبَدَا * عَلَى النَّبِيِّ أَحْمَدَا

Layer: Oh Lord, send prayers forever upon the Prophet Ahmad,
Oh Lord, send prayers forever upon the Prophet Ahmad,

Layer: وَآلِهِ وَصَحْبِهِ * وَتَابِعٍ لِهَدْيِهِ
وَآلِهِ وَصَحْبِهِ * وَتَابِعٍ لِهَدْيِهِ

Layer: And upon his family, his companions, and those who follow his guidance,
And upon his family, his companions, and those who follow his guidance,

Layer: مَا غَرَّدَ الْحَمَامُ * وَسَبَّحَ الْأَنَامُ
مَا غَرَّدَ الْحَمَامُ * وَسَبَّحَ الْأَنَامُ

Layer: As long as the doves sing and mankind glorifies Allah.
As long as the doves sing and mankind glorifies Allah.

